---
description: 'DP, Binary Search'
---

# 300. Longest Increasing Subsequence

### 1. [Problem: ](https://leetcode.com/problems/longest-increasing-subsequence/)

Given an unsorted array of integers, find the length of longest increasing subsequence.

**Example:**

```text
Input: [10,9,2,5,3,7,101,18]
Output: 4 
Explanation: The longest increasing subsequence is [2,3,7,101], therefore the length is 4. 
```

**Note:**

* There may be more than one LIS combination, it is only necessary for you to return the length.
* Your algorithm should run in O\(n ^ 2\) complexity.

**Follow up:** Could you improve it to O\(n log n\) time complexity?



### **2. Solution**

`Subsequence` is not required to be consecutive. So to find the length of Longest Increasing Subsequence, it's intuitive to iterate input\[ \] and maintain an increasing sequence along the way:

* During the process, we could track its size and there must be a moment for it to be the longest.
* However, the final sequence may not be a subsequence because elements are always replaced with smaller ones.

To maintain an increasing sequence during iteration, we need to use another int\[ \], `dp`:

* its left boundary is 0, while right boundary is `lis` 
* `lis` starts from 0 and ends at the result we need, i.e. length of LIS in `input[]`
* for each element, `num` , of `input[]` , we should find its insertion index in `dp[]`
  * replace `dp[insertionIndex]` with `num`
  *  if `insertionIndex` exceeds `dp[]` right boundary, `lis`, increment `lis` by 1 because we've just added a largest element in `dp[]`

=&gt; How to get the `insertionIndex`in JAVA:

[Arrays.binarySearch\(int\[\] input, int startIndex, int endIndex, int target\)](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/util/Arrays.html#binarySearch%28int[],%20int,%20int,%20int%29):

* if target is found, return the index of the target 
* if not found, 
  * within the range of input\[\], returns its insertionIndex
  * out of the range of input\[\] \(target &lt; input\[0\] \|\| target &gt; input\[input.length - 1\]\), return`- insertionIndex - 1` 

{% hint style="info" %}
Time: O\(nlogn\)

where n is the length of input\[\]. It takes O\(logn\) for each element in `input[]` to binarySearch the `insertionIndex` in `dp[]`. Overall, there are n elements in `input[]`.

Space: O\(n\)

we use an extra O\(n\) space for `dp[]`
{% endhint %}



### 3. JAVA Implementation:

```text
public int lengthOfLIS(int[] nums) {
    if (nums == null) {
        return -1;
    }
    
    int[] dp = new int[nums.length];
    int lis = 0; // rightmost index of dp
    for (int n: nums) {
        int insertionIndex = Arrays.binarySearch(dp, 0, lis, n);
        if (insertionIndex < 0) {
            insertionIndex = - insertionIndex - 1;
        }
        
        dp[insertionIndex] = n;
        if (insertionIndex == lis) {
            lis++;
        }
    }
    
    return lis;
}

```



### 4. Extension

