# 75. Sort Colors

### 1. [Description](https://leetcode.com/problems/sort-colors/description/)

Given an array with _n_ objects colored red, white or blue, sort them [**in-place**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/In-place_algorithm) ****so that objects of the same color are adjacent, with the colors in the order red, white and blue.

Here, we will use the integers 0, 1, and 2 to represent the color red, white, and blue respectively.

**Note:** You are not suppose to use the library's sort function for this problem.

**Example:**

```text
Input: [2,0,2,1,1,0]
Output: [0,0,1,1,2,2]
```

**Follow up:**

* A rather straight forward solution is a two-pass algorithm using counting sort. First, iterate the array counting number of 0's, 1's, and 2's, then overwrite array with total number of 0's, then 1's and followed by 2's.
* Could you come up with a one-pass algorithm using only constant space?



### 2. Solution

To solve the problem in one-pass, the basic idea is still, to go through the array. Since we want all 0s followed by 1s and 2s, it can be re-arranged if we could swap the elements which should not be in its original position. 

To be more specific, we need to know determine if an element is at the correct position during the iteration. If not, we should swap them to the proper place.

Therefore, we need 3 pointers:

* `p1`: all elements before it should be 0 \(exclusively\), starts from 0 to len
* `p2`: all elements after it should be 2 \(exclusively\), starts from len - 1 to 0
* `i` : the element we are visiting now \(for iteration\), starts from 0 to len

And the iteration continues until`i == p2`, when all elements in the array have been visited:

* if `nums[i] == 0` , the current element should be before p1 =&gt; swap it with nums\[p1\] =&gt; i points to a 1 \(swapped by p1\), so we increase i by 1 & p1 points to a 0 \(swapped by i\), but p1's left are 0s\(exclusively\), so we increase p1 by1 too.
* if `nums[i] == 1` , the current element should be here =&gt; continue iteration to check the next element =&gt; increase i by 1
* if `nums[i] == 2` , the current element should be after p2 =&gt; swap it with nums\[p2\] =&gt; i points to an unknown num swapped by p2, so do nothing with i now & p2 points to a 2\(swapped by i\), but p2's right are 2s \(exclusively\), so we decrease p2 by 1

**Complexity:**

{% hint style="info" %}
* Time: O\(n\)  

where n represents the length of input array. In essence, we are iterate to array and the comparison and swap for each element takes O\(1\) time.

* Space: O\(1\) 
{% endhint %}



### 3. JAVA Implementation

```text
public void sortColors(int[] nums) {
    // edge cases
    if (nums == null || nums.length == 0) {
        return;
    }
        
    int p1 = 0;
    int p2 = nums.length - 1;
    int i = 0;
    while (i <= p2) {
        if (nums[i] == 0) {
            swap(nums, i, p1);
            i++;
            p1++;
        } else if (nums[i] == 1) {
            i++;
        } else {
            swap(nums, i, p2);
            p2--;
        }
    }
}
    
private void swap(int[] nums, int a, int b) {
    int tmp = nums[a];
    nums[a] = nums[b];
    nums[b] = tmp;
}
```



### 4. Analysis

* Key: understand the meaning each pointer

