---
description: 'Games, Dynamic Programming'
---

# 1025. Divisor Game

### 1. [Problem: ](https://leetcode.com/problems/divisor-game/description/)

Alice and Bob take turns playing a game, with Alice starting first.

Initially, there is a number `N` on the chalkboard.  On each player's turn, that player makes a _move_ consisting of:

* Choosing any `x` with `0 < x < N` and `N % x == 0`.
* Replacing the number `N` on the chalkboard with `N - x`.

Also, if a player cannot make a move, they lose the game.

Return `True` if and only if Alice wins the game, assuming both players play optimally.

**Example 1:**

```text
Input: 2
Output: true
Explanation: Alice chooses 1, and Bob has no more moves.
```

**Example 2:**

```text
Input: 3
Output: false
Explanation: Alice chooses 1, Bob chooses 1, and Alice has no more moves.
```

**Note:**

1. `1 <= N <= 1000`

### **2. Analysis:** 

This is an impartial game whose winning strategy is Normal Play, i.e. the player who makes the last move wins.

If we know whether the next game position, i.e. the outcome of any move of current player, can force a win, we can determine if the player can win now.

**Dynamic Programming:**

* wins\[n\] = at the position/state of n, whether the player can make any move to win.
* base case: n = 1, the player cannot win.
* induction rule: 
  * if there is any x in \[1, n\), wins\[n - x\] = false -&gt; the next game position\(opponent\) cannot win -&gt; current game position\(current player\) can win -&gt; wins\[n\] = true;
  * if wins\[n - x\] are all true when x in \[1, n\)-&gt; the next game position\(the opponent\) can always win -&gt; current game position\(current player\) can never win -&gt; wins\[n\] = false;

**=&gt; Assumption**: 

* 1 &lt;= N &lt;= 1000
* Players always take moves to optimize their result =&gt; as long as there is an option to win, they will choose it.

### 3. Solution:

**Solution 1: Dynamic Programming**

**Steps**

1. Create boolean DP array, wins\[\], to record whether a position could win
2. For n in \[2, N\], populate the DP array based on
   1. wins\[1\] = false;
   2. for x in \[1, n\), if any wins\[n - x\] = false -&gt; wins\[n\] = true;
   3. if no wins\[n - x\] = true when x in \[1, n\) -&gt; wins\[n\] = false
3. return wins\[N\]

**Complexity**

1. Time: O \(n ^ 2\)  

{% hint style="info" %}
2 for loops:

* out loop: n in \[2, N\] to populate the DP array 
* inner loop: x in \[1, n\) to iterate as divisor
{% endhint %}

2. Space: O\(N + 1\)

{% hint style="info" %}
n is in the range of \[1, N\], but the array index is based on 0 -&gt; N + 1 is more intuitive to use
{% endhint %}

### 4. JAVA Implementation:

```text
public boolean divisorGame(int N) {
        boolean[] wins = new boolean[N+1];
        for(int n = 1; n <= N; n++){
            for(int x = 1; x < n; x++){
                if(n % x == 0 && !wins[n - x]){
                    wins[n] = true;
                    break;
                }
            }
        }
        
        return wins[N];
}
```

### 5. Note:

* Tricky Solution: always win when N is even, [https://leetcode.com/problems/divisor-game/discuss/274566/just-return-N-2-0-\(proof\)](https://leetcode.com/problems/divisor-game/discuss/274566/just-return-N-2-0-%28proof%29)



