---
description: Voting
---

# 169. Majority Element

### 1.[ Description](https://leetcode.com/problems/majority-element/description/)

Given an array of size n, find the majority element. The majority element is the element that appears **more than** `⌊ n/2 ⌋` times.

You may assume that the array is non-empty and the majority element always exist in the array.

**Example 1:**

```text
Input: [3,2,3]
Output: 3
```

**Example 2:**

```text
Input: [2,2,1,1,1,2,2]
Output: 2
```



### 2. Solution

The most intuitive solution to find the element which appears more than \[n / 2\] times, is to iterate the array and keep track of frequency of each element.

Solution 1. Maintain a hashmap &lt;key = element, value = frequency&gt; during iteration

{% hint style="info" %}
**Complexity:**

* Time: O\(n\)  

where n represents the length of array. Iteration of each element in the array takes O\(n\) when operation at a single element takes O\(1\).

* Space: O\(n\) 

where n represents the length of array. Because of extra space taken by hashmap for each distinct element. In the worst case, each element appears once.
{% endhint %}

If we have limited space, to optimize it, we have

Solution 2. Sort the array and count adjacent identical elements

{% hint style="info" %}
**Complexity:**

* Time: O\(nlogn\)  

where n represents the length of input array. The sorting process takes O\(nlogn\) if we choose merge sort etc.

* Space: O\(1\) 

because of constant extra space taken by the counter.
{% endhint %}

If we want to optimize time, we have

Solution 3. [Boyer-Moore Majority Vote Algorithm](http://www.cs.utexas.edu/~moore/best-ideas/mjrty/)

The frequency of elements is parallel to voting mechanism, i.e. the most frequent element is the one gets most votes. As assumed in description, there is always an element appears more than n / 2 times.

When iterating the nums array, 

* if the element ==  majority, majorityFrequency++
* if the element != majority, majorityFrequency--

At last, the majorityFrequency should be &gt; 1 because it's &gt; n / 2 and others in total will &lt;= n / 2.

Given the induction above, the vote algorithm requires to maintain a candidate and its freq in 1 pass over the array:

* start with candidate = nums\[0\], freq = 1
* iterate the input array and compare current element to candidate
  * if candidate = current element, freq++
  * else if freq &gt; 0, i.e. candidate frequency is affordable to compete one more round, freq--
  * otherwise,  \(freq = 0\) candidate cannot beat other elements so far, i.e. all previous elements offset to 0 -&gt; from now on, set current value = new candidate & freq = 1
* return the candidate

{% hint style="info" %}
**Complexity:**

* Time: O\(n\)  

where n represents the length of input array. 

* Space: O\(1\) 

because of constant extra space taken by the counter.
{% endhint %}



### 3. JAVA Implementation

```text
public int majorityElement(int[] nums) {
        if (nums == null || nums.length == 0) {
            return -1;
        }
        
        int res = nums[0];
        int count = 1;
        for (int i = 1; i < nums.length; i++) {
            if (res == nums[i]) {
                count++;
            } else if (count > 0) {
                count--;
            } else {
                res = nums[i];
                count = 1;
            }
        }
        
        return res;
}
```



### 4. Analysis

* If we don't have the assumption that there is always such majority element exists, the solution needs a second pass to confirm whether the candidate's frequency &gt; n / 2.
* 229. Majority Elements II
* 1150. Check if Number if Majority Element in a Sorted Array
* Ref: [https://gregable.com/2013/10/majority-vote-algorithm-find-majority.html](https://gregable.com/2013/10/majority-vote-algorithm-find-majority.html)

