# 220. Contains Duplicate III

### 1. [Description](https://leetcode.com/problems/contains-duplicate-iii/description/)

Given an array of integers, find out whether there are two distinct indices i and j in the array such that the **absolute** difference between **nums\[i\]** and **nums\[j\]** is at most t and the **absolute** difference between i and j is at most k.

**Example 1:**

```text
Input: nums = [1,2,3,1], k = 3, t = 0
Output: true
```

**Example 2:**

```text
Input: nums = [1,0,1,1], k = 1, t = 2
Output: true
```

**Example 3:**

```text
Input: nums = [1,5,9,1,5,9], k = 2, t = 3
Output: false
```



### 2. Solution

Compared with 219. Contains Duplicate II, this problem makes it harder by changing the absolute difference from a value to a range. So in the sliding window, it's not enough to use a hashSet to quickly maintain and compare the incoming value with a value any longer.

So to keep the time complexity as constant for each element, the key is to figure out a way to compare the incoming value with a range in O\(1\). 

So suppose we divide the array into several ranges/buckets. When iterating the array and maintaining the sliding window \(at most size k\), we want to check if there is duplicate element in any range/bucket quickly. So we determine which range the current element should fall into

* any existed elements in its `previous range`, `its range`, or its `next range` are possible to be duplicate -&gt; verify "duplicate" -&gt; return true. 
* otherwise -&gt; no duplicate for now -&gt; add the current element into its corresponding range and continue iteration

Therefore, we need a HashMap\(at most k or n\) to maintain what range contains what element \(at most 1, otherwise it should be already returned\). When iterating an element:

* calculate which range should it falls into \(range width should be `t + 1`
* check if the calculated range, OR its previous one, OR its next one, has any existing element
  * if so -&gt; verify if contains "duplicate" within the range -&gt; return true
  * otherwise, add into the hashMap as &lt;Key=calculateRange\#, Value=currentElement&gt;
* check the size of hash map, i.e.sliding window
  * if `size > k`-&gt; delete the first added element in the window
  * otherwise, continue
* return false

**Complexity:**

{% hint style="info" %}
* Time: O\(n\)  

where n is the size of input array. 

* Space: O\(Math.min\(t, n\)\) 

where k is the given value and n is the size of input. Because the extra space taken is to maintain the sliding window.
{% endhint %}



### 3. JAVA Implementation

```text
public boolean containsNearbyAlmostDuplicate(int[] nums, int k, int t) {
    if (nums == null || nums.length == 0 || t < 0) {
        return false;
    }
    
    Map<Long, Long> map = new HashMap<>();
    long width = t + 1;
    for (int i = 0; i < nums.length; i++) {
        long id = getId((long) nums[i], width);
        if (map.containsKey(id)) {
            return true;
        }
        
        if (map.containsKey(id - 1) && Math.abs(map.get(id - 1) - nums[i]) <= t) {
            return true;
        }
        
        if (map.containsKey(id + 1) && Math.abs(map.get(id + 1) - nums[i]) <= t) {
            return true;
        }
        
        map.put(id, (long) nums[i]);
        if (map.size() > k) {
            map.remove(getId(nums[i - k], width)); // hashMap.remove() requires the key
        }
    }    
    
    return false;
}

private long getId(long val, long width) {
    return val < 0 ? (val + 1) / width - 1 : val / width;
}
```



### 4. Analysis

* hashMap.remove\(AnyType key\), so don't use the value, nums\[i - k\]
* when calculating the range/bucket id 
  * width could be out of integer range because  `t + 1` where t could be Integer.MAX\_VALUE
  * if value &lt; 0, val/width doesn't returns the expected id, need to shift 1 \(not absolutely symmetric for positive and negative due to 0\)

