# 26. Remove Duplicates from Sorted Array

### 1. [Description](https://leetcode.com/problems/remove-duplicates-from-sorted-array/description/)

Given a sorted array _nums_, remove the duplicates [**in-place**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/In-place_algorithm) such that each element appear only _once_ and return the new length.

Do not allocate extra space for another array, you must do this by **modifying the input array** [**in-place**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/In-place_algorithm) with O\(1\) extra memory.

**Example 1:**

```text
Given nums = [1,1,2],

Your function should return length = 2, with the first two elements of nums being 1 and 2 respectively.

It doesn't matter what you leave beyond the returned length.
```

**Example 2:**

```text
Given nums = [0,0,1,1,1,2,2,3,3,4],

Your function should return length = 5, with the first five elements of nums being modified to 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 respectively.

It doesn't matter what values are set beyond the returned length.
```

\*\*\*\*

### 2. Solution

To remove duplicate elements in an array in an in-place way, we have to modify the array to make its left part contains de-duplicated elements only.

So it's reasonable to declare a pointer, which means all the elements before it \(exclusively\) has been de-duplicated during iteration. 

The solution scans all elements during an iteration, and copy elements which appear for the first time to the pointer's position:

* sanity check \(return 0 if input not valid\)
* initialize resultIndex starting from 1, which means all the elements before it \(exclusively\) is the valid final result, i.e. de-duplicated
* iterate the input array\(from index = 1\) and compare current element with the element whose position is before resultIndex
  * if element == input\[resultIndex - 1\], continue
  * otherwise, the current element should be in the valid result for return -&gt; copy current element to resultIndex's position & resultIndex++
* return resultIndex, because the resultIndex means all the elements before it\(exclusively\) are valid -&gt; the amount of valid elements = resultIndex - 1 + 1 = resultIndex

{% hint style="info" %}
**Complexity:**

* Time: O\(n\)  

where n represents the length of array. Iteration of each element in the array takes O\(n\) when operation\(copy\) at a single element takes constant O\(1\).

* Space: O\(1\) 

only takes constant extra space for resultIndex, for loop etc.
{% endhint %}



### 3. JAVA Implementation

```text
 public int removeDuplicates(int[] nums) {
    if (nums == null || nums.length == 0) {
        return 0;
    }
        
    int res = 1;
    for (int i = 1; i < nums.length; i++) {
        if (nums[res - 1] != nums[i]) {
            nums[res++] = nums[i];
        }
    }
        
    return res;
}
```



### 4. Analysis

* Examining basic operations of array
* The key is to understand what the pointer \(resultIndex\) for:
  * meaning: all the elements before it \(exclusively\) is valid, i.e.de-duplicated
  * what to compare with current element in iteration: nums\[resultIndex - 1\], i.e. last valid element so far
  * where to put the copied current element in iteration: nums\[resultIndex\], i.e. the first "invalid" position
  * what to return as the amount of valid elements: resultIndex = resultIndex - 1\(because this pointer excludes itself to mark the valid index\) + 1 \(convert from 0-based index to count of valid elements\) 
* Extension: what if each element is allowed at most twice? 
  * 80. Remove Duplicates from Sorted Array II

