# 27. Remove Element

### 1.[ Description](https://leetcode.com/problems/remove-element/description/)

Given an array _nums_ and a value _val_, remove all instances of that value [**in-place**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/In-place_algorithm) and return the new length.

Do not allocate extra space for another array, you must do this by **modifying the input array** [**in-place**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/In-place_algorithm) with O\(1\) extra memory.

The order of elements can be changed. It doesn't matter what you leave beyond the new length.

**Example 1:**

```text
Given nums = [3,2,2,3], val = 3,

Your function should return length = 2, with the first two elements of nums being 2.

It doesn't matter what you leave beyond the returned length.
```

**Example 2:**

```text
Given nums = [0,1,2,2,3,0,4,2], val = 2,

Your function should return length = 5, with the first five elements of nums containing 0, 1, 3, 0, and 4.

Note that the order of those five elements can be arbitrary.

It doesn't matter what values are set beyond the returned length.
```

**Clarification:**

Confused why the returned value is an integer but your answer is an array?

Note that the input array is passed in by **reference**, which means modification to the input array will be known to the caller as well.

Internally you can think of this:

```text
// nums is passed in by reference. (i.e., without making a copy)
int len = removeElement(nums, val);

// any modification to nums in your function would be known by the caller.
// using the length returned by your function, it prints the first len elements.
for (int i = 0; i < len; i++) {
    print(nums[i]);
}
```



### 2. Solution

To remove the duplicate elements in an array in an in-place way, we have to modify the array somehow.

Since there is a statement that order can be changed, it suggests that we could take actions like swapping 2 elements, maybe one from start and the other one from end.

There is another statement that what leaves beyond the result index does not matter, so it suggests that we could take actions like copying "valid" elements to positions taken by "invalid" elements previously to keep a "condensed" valid array from 0 to resultIndex.

Solution 1: Copy

* sanity check \(return 0 if input not valid\)
* initialize resultIndex starting from 0, which means all the elements before it \(exclusively\) is the valid final result, i.e. doesn't contain target
* iterate the input array and compare current element with target in each round
  * if element == target, continue
  * otherwise, the current element should be in the valid result for return -&gt; copy current element to resultIndex's position & resultIndex++
* return resultIndex, because the resultIndex means all the elements before it\(exclusively\) are valid -&gt; the amount of valid elements = resultIndex - 1 + 1 = resultIndex

{% hint style="info" %}
**Complexity:**

* Time: O\(n\)  

where n represents the length of array. Iteration of each element in the array takes O\(n\) when operation\(copy\) at a single element takes constant O\(1\).

* Space: O\(1\) 

only takes constant extra space for resultIndex, for loop etc.
{% endhint %}

Solution 2. Swap

This solution is more suitable when there are few elements == target in input

* sanity check \(return 0 if input not valid\)
* initialize 
  * left starting from 0, which means all the elements before it \(exclusively\) is the valid final result, i.e. doesn't contain target
  * right starting from input.length - 1, which is used for swap candidates to cover "invalid" position scanned by left
* while left &lt;= right
  * if element != target -&gt; the left element should be contained in left -&gt; left++
  * otherwise, the left element should no be contained in left -&gt; swap with right element -&gt; the swapped right element is definitely invalid and not swap back any more-&gt; right--
* return left \(== right\) because the termination condition of while loop is left &lt;= right, it exits one step after left == right -&gt; right moves one step lefter than left -&gt; return right + 1

corner case is input has only 1 element & input\[0\] == target

{% hint style="info" %}
**Complexity:**

* Time: O\(n\)  

where n represents the length of array. Iteration of each element in the array takes O\(n\) when operation\(swap\) at a single element takes constant O\(1\). However, it reduces a lot of unnecessary copy when there are few element == target.

* space: O\(1\)
{% endhint %}



### 3. JAVA Implementation

Solution 1: copy

```text
public int removeElement(int[] nums, int val) {
    if (nums == null || nums.length == 0) {
        return 0;
    }
        
    int res = 0;
    for (int i = 0; i < nums.length; i++) {
        if (nums[i] != val) {
            nums[res++] = nums[i];
        }
    }
        
    return res;
}
```

Solution 2: swap

```text
public int removeElement(int[] nums, int val) {
    if (nums == null || nums.length == 0) {
        return 0;
    }
        
    int left = 0;
    int right = nums.length - 1;
    while (left <= right) {
        if (nums[left] == val) {
            nums[left] = nums[right--]; // or swap(nums, left, right++), but we don't really need the target at right side, so just copy in such single direction way
        } else {
            left++;
        }
    }
        
    return right + 1;
}
```

### 4. Analysis

* basic operation of array
  * copy
  * swap
* highlights the feature of array: cannot modify its length once initialized 

