# 283. Move Zeroes

### [1. Description](https://leetcode.com/problems/move-zeroes/description/)

Given an array `nums`, write a function to move all `0`'s to the end of it while maintaining the relative order of the non-zero elements.

**Example:**

```text
Input: [0,1,0,3,12]
Output: [1,3,12,0,0]
```

**Note**:

1. You must do this **in-place** without making a copy of the array.
2. Minimize the total number of operations.



### 2. Solution

Similar to 280 Wiggle Sort, if we need to solve this problem in-place, the key is to swap during iteration.

Suppose we have 2 pointers:

* pointer index: for iteration
* pointer result: to mark the pivot between non-zero and zeroes. \(the pointer itself should points to zero\)

 Increase pointer `index` to iterate. If we come across an "invalid" element, i.e. 0, we should swap it with pointer `result` to maintain the "pivot". 

* compare `nums[index]` with 0:
  * if nums\[index\] != 0, we should keep the valid numbers by copying it to be nums\[res\] -&gt; swap -&gt; increase index and res so that: 
    * index: could iterate the next element 
    * res: keep being the pivot between non-zero and zeroes \(inclusively\) 
  * otherwise, just increase index until it reaches another non-zero number to swap
* if res &lt; nums.length, the rest part should all be set as 0s.

**Complexity:**

{% hint style="info" %}
* Time: O\(n\)  

where n represents the length of input array. In essence, we iterate the array and do the comparison and swap for each element, which takes O\(1\) time.

In this way, we could try to minimize the operation of swaps because when nums\[index\] != 0, we just increase index until it hits another non-zero number to continue the swap.

* Space: O\(1\) 

in-place as requested
{% endhint %}



### 3. JAVA Implementation

```text
public void moveZeroes(int[] nums) {
    if (nums == null || nums.length == 0) {
        return;
    }
        
    int res = 0;
    int index = 0;
    while (index < nums.length) {
        if (nums[index] == 0) {
            index++;
        } else {
            swap(nums, index++, res++);
        }
    }
        
    while (res < nums.length) {
        nums[res++] = 0;
    }
}
    
private void swap(int[] nums, int a, int b) {
    int tmp = nums[a];
    nums[a] = nums[b];
    nums[b] = tmp;
}
```



### 4. Analysis

* The key is to maintain the meaning of `res`

