---
description: Radix Sort
---

# 41. First Missing Positive

### 1. [Description](https://leetcode.com/problems/first-missing-positive/description/)

Given an unsorted integer array, find the smallest missing positive integer.

**Example 1:**

```text
Input: [1,2,0]
Output: 3
```

**Example 2:**

```text
Input: [3,4,-1,1]
Output: 2
```

**Example 3:**

```text
Input: [7,8,9,11,12]
Output: 1
```

**Note:**

Your algorithm should run in _O_\(_n_\) time and uses constant extra space.  


### 2. Solution

Due to the limit of O\(n\) time and O\(1\) space, we have to solve the problem making use of iteration\(time\) and the input array itself\(space\).  

So in terms of space, we want to make it in-place, but we don't want to lose track of the useful values. How could we keep the "useful values" while making use of the space input array? We could combine:

* switching between positive and negative \(keeping Math.abs\(\) for the values\)
* array index vs array values

Step 1.to switch the negative vs positive numbers and not causing any mistake, the prerequisite is the input array contains negative/positive number ONLY. 

1.1 spot "useless" numbers

Since we are looking for "the first missing positive", so **negative numbers** are "useless". 

Besides, the max missing positive &lt;= input.length, so positive **number &gt; input.length** are "useless".

1.2 melt "useless" numbers into "useful" input array.

After defining the "useless" values, how to melt them into "useful" input array? How about marking them as "1"? 

To disguise "useless" values as "1", we should 1.3 guarantee there was "1" existing in the input in case of adding something non-existing:

* check if original input array contains 1
  * if not -&gt; input lacks 1 -&gt; 1 is the first positive -&gt; 1 is the first missing positive in this input -&gt; return 1
  * otherwise, assign "useless" values to be 1

Step 2. make use of array index vs values

If we want to make use of differentiating array index vs values, we can get a `newIndex = input[currIndex]` . What to do with input\[newIndex\] to not only **keep its value** but also **mark it as "not-missing"**?

* keep its value: keep **absolute value** of input\[newIndex\] at least.
* mark it as "not-missing": make positive input\[newIndex\] to be negative \(do nothing if it has been made to be negative already\)

Step 3. check the modified array and return the first positive value

**Complexity:**

{% hint style="info" %}
* Time: O\(n\)  

where n refers to the length of input array.

* Space: O\(1\) 

because it's done in-place
{% endhint %}



### 3. JAVA Implementation

```text
public int firstMissingPositive(int[] nums) {
    if (nums == null || nums.length == 0) {
        return 1;
    }
        
    int containsOne = 0;
    for (int n: nums) {
        if (n == 1) {
            containsOne++;
        }
    } 
    if (containsOne == 0) {
        return 1;
    }
    if (containsOne == 1 && nums.length == 1) {
        return 2;
    }
        
    for (int i = 0; i < nums.length; i++) {
        if (nums[i] <= 0 || nums[i] > nums.length) {
            nums[i] = 1;
        }
    }
        
    for (int i = 0; i < nums.length; i++) {
        int newIndex = Math.abs(nums[i]);
        if (newIndex == nums.length) {
            nums[0] = 0 - Math.abs(nums[0]); // in case of ArrayOutOfBound Errors
        } else {
            nums[newIndex] = 0 - Math.abs(nums[newIndex]);
        }
    }
        
    for (int i = 1; i < nums.length; i++) {
        if (nums[i] > 0) {
            return i;
        }
    }
        
    if (nums[0] > 0) {
        return nums.length;
    }
        
    return nums.length + 1;
}
```



4. Analysis

1. corner cases:
   1. missing 1
   2. \[1\] \(missing 2\)
   3. missing nums.length + 1
   4. missing nums.length
2. note the array boundary 
   1. newIndex = nums.length? take the space of nums\[0\] instead of nums\[nums.length\] 
   2. newIndex &lt; 0? fetch its absolute value
3. post-process / last round of iteration must **iterate from nums\[1\]** to nums\[nums.length - 1\], then **check nums\[0\]**, finally **return nums.length + 1**

