# 80. Remove Duplicates from Sorted Array II

### 1. [Description](https://leetcode.com/problems/remove-duplicates-from-sorted-array/description/)

Given a sorted array _nums_, remove the duplicates [**in-place**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/In-place_algorithm) such that duplicates appeared at most _twice_ and return the new length.

Do not allocate extra space for another array, you must do this by **modifying the input array** [**in-place**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/In-place_algorithm) with O\(1\) extra memory.

**Example 1:**

```text
Given nums = [1,1,1,2,2,3],

Your function should return length = 5, with the first five elements of nums being 1, 1, 2, 2 and 3 respectively.

It doesn't matter what you leave beyond the returned length.
```

**Example 2:**

```text
Given nums = [0,0,1,1,1,1,2,3,3],

Your function should return length = 7, with the first seven elements of nums being modified to 0, 0, 1, 1, 2, 3 and 3 respectively.

It doesn't matter what values are set beyond the returned length.
```

\*\*\*\*

### 2. Solution

Based on[ Problem 26. Remove Duplicates from Sorted Array II](https://app.gitbook.com/@alittlebit/s/data-structures-and-algorithms-in-java/array/26.-remove-duplicates-from-sorted-array), this problem requires us to keep appearance  of each element &lt;= 2 times. To remove "duplicates" in place, we still have to modify the array so that its left part contains "de-duplicated" elements only.

Similarly, we need to declare a pointer, which means all the elements before it \(exclusively\) has appeared at most twice. 

The solution scans all elements during an iteration, and copy elements which appear for the first/second time to the pointer's position:

* sanity check 
  * return 0 if input = null
  * return length if input's length &lt;= 2 \(elements in such input must be all valid\)
* initialize resultIndex starting from 2, which means all the elements before it \(exclusively\) is the valid final result, i.e. appearance limit as 2
* iterate the input array\(start from index=2\) and compare current element with the element whose position = resultIndex - 2
  * if element == input\[resultIndex - 2\] -&gt; this element has appeared a 3rd time -&gt; continue
  * otherwise, the current element should be in the valid result for return, i.e. appeared twice at most -&gt; copy current element to resultIndex's position & resultIndex++
* return resultIndex, because the resultIndex means all the elements before it\(exclusively\) are valid -&gt; the amount of valid elements = resultIndex - 1 + 1 = resultIndex

{% hint style="info" %}
**Complexity:**

* Time: O\(n\)  

where n represents the length of array. Iteration of each element in the array takes O\(n\) when operation\(copy\) at a single element takes constant O\(1\).

* Space: O\(1\) 

only takes constant extra space for resultIndex, for loop etc.
{% endhint %}



### 3. JAVA Implementation

```text
 public int removeDuplicates(int[] nums) {
    if (nums == null) {
        return 0;
    }
    if (nums.length <= 2) {
        return nums.length;
    }
    
    int res = 2;
    for (int i = 2; i < nums.length; i++) {
        if (nums[res - 2] != nums[i]) {
            nums[res++] = nums[i];
        }
    }
        
    return res;
}
```



### 4. Comments

* Examining basic operations of array 
* More complex in corner cases
  * null input -&gt; 0
  * input.length &lt;= 2 -&gt; all valid -&gt; return input.length
  * iteration & resultPointer starts at index = 2
* The key is to understand what the pointer \(resultIndex\) for:
  * meaning: all the elements before it \(exclusively\) is valid, i.e.appearance bounded &lt;= 2
  * what to compare with current element in iteration: nums\[resultIndex - 2\] -&gt; to check if it's the 3rd+ appearance of this number
  * where to put the copied current element in iteration: nums\[resultIndex\], i.e. the first "invalid" position
  * what to return as the amount of valid elements: resultIndex = resultIndex - 1\(because this pointer excludes itself to mark the valid index\) + 1 \(convert from 0-based index to count of valid elements\) 
* Extension: what if each element is allowed at most k times?
  * update corner cases
  * update the start index of iteration and resultIndex to k
  * change the comparison to: nums\[resultIndex - k\] vs nums\[currentIndex\] -&gt; check if it's the \(k + 1\)th appearance of this number



