---
description: LinkedList
---

# 147. Insertion Sort List

### 1. [Description](https://leetcode.com/problems/insertion-sort-list/)

A graphical example of insertion sort. The partial sorted list \(black\) initially contains only the first element in the list.  
With each iteration one element \(red\) is removed from the input data and inserted in-place into the sorted list**.**

**Algorithm of Insertion Sort:**

1. Insertion sort iterates, consuming one input element each repetition, and growing a sorted output list.
2. At each iteration, insertion sort removes one element from the input data, finds the location it belongs within the sorted list, and inserts it there.
3. It repeats until no input elements remain.

**Example 1:**

```text
Input: -1->5->3->4->0
Output: -1->0->3->4->5
```

**Example 2:**

```text
Input: 4->2->1->3
Output: 1->2->3->4
```



### 2. Solution

Insertion sort splits the linked list into 2 halves: 

* sorted part
* unsorted part.

At the beginning, the unsorted part contains n nodes while sorted part has 0.

For each node in the unsorted part, we iterate in sorted list to find the position it should be.

Once position found, we insert the node there. And thus, we decrease the size of unsorted list by 1 and increases the size of sorted part by 1.

In the end, the unsorted part has nothing left, and sorted part has n nodes.

{% hint style="info" %}
**Complexity:**

* Time: O\(n ^ 2\)  

where n represents the size of list. For each node in the list, we need to iterate the sorted part to find the exact position for insertion. In the worst case, we have to do O\(n\) for each node, and there are n nodes in total. So it's a O\(n ^ 2\)

* Space: O\(1\) 

because we are not using extra space except the fast and slow pointers.
{% endhint %}



### 3. JAVA Implementation

```text
public ListNode insertionSortList(ListNode head) {
    ListNode dummy = new ListNode(0);
    while (head != null) {
        ListNode tmp = head.next;
        head.next = null;
        insert(dummy, head);
        head = tmp;
    }
        
    return dummy.next;
}
    
private void insert(ListNode curr, ListNode node) {
    while (curr.next != null && curr.next.val < node.val) {
        curr = curr.next;
    }
        
    ListNode tmp = curr.next;
    curr.next = node;
    node.next = tmp;
}
```



### 4. Comments

* 708. Insert Into a Cyclic Linked List.

