# 24. Swap Nodes in Pairs

### 1. [Description](https://leetcode.com/problems/swap-nodes-in-pairs/)

Given a linked list, swap every two adjacent nodes and return its head.

You may **not** modify the values in the list's nodes, only nodes itself may be changed.

**Example:**

```text
Given 1->2->3->4, you should return the list as 2->1->4->3.
```



### 2. Solution

The intuition to solve this problem is to break it down using recursion like 25. 

If we can get the recursion result of `head.next.next`, all we need to do is to swap the `head` and `head.next`

original status: head---------head.next -&gt; head.next.next --------------------------------------nodeN

current step:     head.next---------head -&gt; RECURSION\(head.next.next------------------nodeN\)

* base case:
  * head == null: return `head`
  * head.next == null: return `head`
* recursive rule: 
  * get the recursion result of \(`head.next.next` - `nodeN`\)
  * record`head.next` with`newHead`to keep track
  * reset next pointer of `head.next`: backward to `head`
  * link the next pointer of `head` : link to recursion result
  * return the `newHead`

{% hint style="info" %}
**Complexity:**

* Time: O\(n\)  

where n represents the size of list. There is \(n / 2\) levels in the recursion tree. And each level takes O\(1\) time for reverse k-size part and link with recursive result.

* Space: O\(1\) 
{% endhint %}



### 3. JAVA Implementation

```text
/**
 * Definition for singly-linked list.
 * public class ListNode {
 *     int val;
 *     ListNode next;
 *     ListNode(int x) { val = x; }
 * }
 */
class Solution {
    public ListNode swapPairs(ListNode head) {
        if (head == null || head.next == null) {
            return head;
        }
        
        ListNode next = swapPairs(head.next.next);
        ListNode newHead = head.next;
        
        head.next.next = head;
        head.next = next;
        
        return newHead;
    }
}
```



### 4. Comments

* A simplified version of 25. Reverse Nodes in k-Group because only 2 nodes in a group for reverse
  * easier to get the next 2-node group -&gt; requires for loops for k-Group
  * easier to reverse a 2-node group -&gt; requires while loops for k-Group

