# 328. Odd Even Linked List

### 1. [Description](https://leetcode.com/problems/odd-even-linked-list/)

Given a singly linked list, group all odd nodes together followed by the even nodes. Please note here we are talking about the node number and not the value in the nodes.

You should try to do it in place. The program should run in O\(1\) space complexity and O\(nodes\) time complexity.

**Example 1:**

```text
Input: 1->2->3->4->5->NULL
Output: 1->3->5->2->4->NULL
```

**Example 2:**

```text
Input: 2->1->3->5->6->4->7->NULL
Output: 2->3->6->7->1->5->4->NULL
```

**Note:**

* The relative order inside both the even and odd groups should remain as it was in the input.
* The first node is considered odd, the second node even and so on ...



### 2. Solution

1. separate the original list into 2 lists, one with its odd nodes while the other with even nodes.
2. link the head of even list with the tail of odd list
3. return the head of even list

The problem follows up that how to separate the original list?

We could use 2 dummy nodes respectively as the previous node of heads to odd list and even list. While we iterate the original list,

* if the node visiting is odd \(starting from the first\), append it as the next of odd dummy and move odd head 1 step forward
* if the node visiting is even, append it as the next of even dummy and move even head 1 step forward.
* switch the isOdd to its opposite
* move dummy 1 step forward

{% hint style="info" %}
**Complexity:**

* Time: O\(n\)  

where n represents the size of input list.

* Space: O\(1\) 

because we are not using extra space.
{% endhint %}



### 3. JAVA Implementation

```text
public ListNode oddEvenList(ListNode head) {
    if (head == null || head.next == null) {
        return head;
    }
        
    ListNode odd = new ListNode(0);
    ListNode even = new ListNode(0);
    ListNode copyOdd = odd;
    ListNode copyEven = even;
        
    boolean isOdd = true;
    while (head != null) {
        ListNode next = head.next;
        head.next = null; //!
        if (isOdd) {
            odd.next = head;
            odd = odd.next;
        } else {
            even.next = head;
            even = even.next;
        }
        head = next;
        isOdd = !isOdd;
    }
    odd.next = copyEven.next;
        
    return copyOdd.next;
}
```



### 4. Comments

* Use dummy nodes to keep track of the head of odd and even list respectively
* remember to "cut off" the next of each "head" in while loop in case of cycles

