# 82. Remove Duplicates from Sorted List II

### 1. [Description](https://leetcode.com/problems/remove-duplicates-from-sorted-list-ii/)

Given a sorted linked list, delete all nodes that have duplicate numbers, leaving only _distinct_ numbers from the original list.

**Example 1:**

```text
Input: 1->2->3->3->4->4->5
Output: 1->2->5
```

**Example 2:**

```text
Input: 1->1->1->2->3
Output: 2->3
```

### 

### 2. Solution

The requirement differs with Problem 83. Remove Duplicates from Sorted List in the definition of "delete duplicates":

* Problem 83. we keep one copy if duplicates
* Problem 82. we don't keep any copy if duplicates

So, the iteration of singly linked list remains, but we have to be more conservative in moving the iterator pointer forward. 

When we are visiting the current node, we cannot consider it as a valid until finish the comparison with next nodes. Therefore, what we used to keep track of valid result list is the node before currently visiting node. 

For the currently visiting node, we need to figure out whether it's duplicate. So we use a while loop and compare until its value differs from its next value:

* not duplicate: `prev.next` should point to current node
* duplicate with next 1/more nodes: `prev.next` should point to the next node after all these duplicates

So how do we make sure if it's duplicate or not? Maintain a counter during comparison loop, and as a result,

* not duplicate: counter = 0 -&gt; prev.next = curr;
* duplicate with next 1/more nodes: counter &gt; 0 -&gt; prev.next = firstNonDuplicateNode \(curr.val != duplicate value\)

{% hint style="info" %}
**Complexity:**

* Time: O\(n\)  

where n represents the size of linked list. Iteration of the list takes O\(n\) when comparison and reaction at each individual node takes constant O\(1\).

* Space: O\(1\) 

only takes constant extra space.
{% endhint %}



### 3. JAVA Implementation

```text
public ListNode deleteDuplicates(ListNode head) {
    if (head == null || head.next == null) {
            return head;
        }
        
        ListNode dummy = new ListNode(0);
        ListNode prev = dummy;
        while (head != null) {
            ListNode end = head.next;
            int count = 0;
            while (end != null && end.val == head.val) {
                end = end.next;
                count++;
            }
            
            if (count == 0) {
                prev.next = head;
                prev = prev.next;
                head = head.next;
            } else {
                prev.next = end;
                head = end;
            }
        }
        
    return dummy.next;    
}
 
```



### 4. Comments

* Keep track of a prev node to simplify the inserting new node to the list tail.
* Keep record of a dummy node to build and track a new list
* Keep record of a counter to differ nonDuplicates and duplicates.

