# 83. Remove Duplicates from Sorted List

### 1. [Description](https://leetcode.com/problems/remove-duplicates-from-sorted-list/)

Given a sorted linked list, delete all duplicates such that each element appear only _once_.

**Example 1:**

```text
Input: 1->1->2
Output: 1->2
```

**Example 2:**

```text
Input: 1->1->2->3->3
Output: 1->2->3
```

\*\*\*\*

### 2. Solution

Since the linked list is already sorted, we could easily figure out duplicate node by comparing the adjacent nodes in iteration:

* current node's value == its next node's value, delete next node by resetting the nextPointer of current node from `next`to `next.next`
* otherwise, move the current pointer to its next;

{% hint style="info" %}
**Complexity:**

* Time: O\(n\)  

where n represents the size of linked list. Iteration of the list takes O\(n\) when comparison and potential reset of next pointer at each individual element takes constant O\(1\).

* Space: O\(1\) 

only takes constant extra space.
{% endhint %}



### 3. JAVA Implementation

```text
public ListNode deleteDuplicates(ListNode head) {
    if (head == null || head.next == null) {
         return head;
    }
    
    ListNode curr = head;
    while (curr != null && curr.next != null) {
           if (curr.val == curr.next.val) {
               curr.next = curr.next.next;
           } else {
               curr = curr.next;
           }
    }
    
    return head;
}
 
```



### 4. Comments

* Examining basic operations of singly linked list: per the definition of a singly linked list node, we don't have access to any previous node. So the comparison should between curr and curr.next, which results in some edge cases:
  * head == null \(list.size\(\) == 0\)
  * head.next == null \(list.size\(\) == 1\)
  * Null Pointer Exception in while loop \(curr == null \|\| curr.next == null\)
* when curr.val == curr.next.val, curr MUST NOT be moved forward because its equality with the new nextNode is UNKNOWN.
* Extension: 
  * 26. Remove Duplicates from Sorted Array
  * 80. Remove Duplicates from Sorted Array II
  * 203. Remove Linked List Elements

