---
description: Tree
---

# 145. Binary Tree Postorder Traversal

### 1.[ Description](https://leetcode.com/problems/binary-tree-postorder-traversal/description/)

Given a binary tree, return the _postorder_ traversal of its nodes' values.

**Example:**

```text
Input: [1,null,2,3]
   1
    \
     2
    /
   3

Output: [3,2,1]
```

**Follow up:** Recursive solution is trivial, could you do it iteratively?



### 2. Solution

Preorder traversal means we traverse all the nodes in this tree with the order: leftChild -&gt; rightChild -&gt; root

**2.1 Recursion**

When looking at each node in this tree, determine: 

* if root is null -&gt; nothing to do -&gt; return;
* otherwise:
  * recursive call to its leftChild 
  * recursive call to its rightChild
  * add the value of root in result list

{% hint style="info" %}
* Time: O\(n\)  

where n represents the amount of nodes in tree. After all, traversal means visit all the nodes in the tree.

* Space: O\(n\)  

where n represents the amount of nodes in tree. In the worst case, the recursion call stack has to store all the nodes if it's skewed as a linked list.
{% endhint %}

**2.2 Iteration**

Compare:

* iteration of preorder traversal: root -&gt; left -&gt; right
* iteration of postorder traversal: left -&gt; right -&gt; root

If we could add the root at the start of result list each time, we can easily get the solution by altering part of the order while maintaining our explicit "call stack":

* If root is null -&gt; return empty list
* otherwise, push it to stack
* While the stack is not empty:
  * pop the top of stack as root
  * add root.val at the start of result list 
  * if leftChild is not null -&gt; push to stack \(because stack is LIFO -&gt; reverse the order + add value to the list beginning -&gt; reverse the order  =&gt; don't reverse the order\)
  * if rightChild is not null -&gt; push to stack

{% hint style="info" %}
**Complexity:**

* Time: O\(n\)  

  where n represents the amount of nodes in tree. After all, traversal means visit all the nodes in the tree.

* Space: O\(n\)  

  where n represents the amount of nodes in tree. In the worst case, the stack has to store all the nodes if it's skewed as a linked list.
{% endhint %}



### 3. JAVA Implementation

```text
public class TreeNode {
     int val;
     TreeNode left;
     TreeNode right;
     TreeNode(int x) { val = x; }
}

public List<Integer> postorderTraversal(TreeNode root) {
        List<Integer> res = new ArrayList<>();
        if (root == null) {
            return res;
        }
        Stack<TreeNode> stack = new Stack<>();
        stack.push(root);
        
        while (!stack.isEmpty()) {
            root = stack.pop();
            res.add(0, root.val);
            
            if (root.left != null) {
                stack.push(root.left);
            }
            if (root.right != null) {
                stack.push(root.right);
            }
        }
        
        return res;
}
```



### 4. Extension

* [144. Binary Tree Preorder Traversal](https://app.gitbook.com/@alittlebit/s/data-structures-and-algorithms-in-java/144.-binary-tree-preorder-traversal)

