---
description: Tree
---

# 94. Binary Tree Inorder Traversal

### 1. [Description](https://leetcode.com/problems/binary-tree-inorder-traversal/description/)

Given a binary tree, return the _inorder_ traversal of its nodes' values.

**Example:**

```text
Input: [1,null,2,3]
   1
    \
     2
    /
   3

Output: [1,3,2]
```



### 2. Solution

Inorder traversal means we traverse all the nodes in this tree with the order: leftChild -&gt; root -&gt; rightChild

**2.1 Recursion**

When looking at each node in this tree, determine: 

* if root is null -&gt; nothing to do -&gt; return;
* otherwise:
  * recursive call to its leftChild 
  * add the value of root in result list
  * recursive call to its rightChild

{% hint style="info" %}
* Time: O\(n\)  

where n represents the amount of nodes in tree. After all, traversal means visit all the nodes in the tree.

* Space: O\(n\)  

where n represents the amount of nodes in tree. In the worst case, the recursion call stack has to store all the nodes if it's skewed as a linked list.
{% endhint %}

**2.2 Iteration**

Based on recursion solution, we could solve it iteratively by maintaining our explicit "call stack". While the stack is not empty OR root != null:

* go to the leftmost child of root and pushing nodes along the way
* pop the top of stack as root
* add root.val in the result list
* visit right child by shifting root to root.right

{% hint style="info" %}
**Complexity:**

* Time: O\(n\)  

  where n represents the amount of nodes in tree. After all, traversal means visit all the nodes in the tree.

* Space: O\(n\)  

  where n represents the amount of nodes in tree. In the worst case, the stack has to store all the nodes if it's skewed as a linked list.
{% endhint %}



### 3. JAVA Implementation

```text
public class TreeNode {
     int val;
     TreeNode left;
     TreeNode right;
     TreeNode(int x) { val = x; }
}

public List<Integer> inorderTraversal(TreeNode root) {
	List<Integer> res = new ArrayList<>();
	Stack<TreeNode> stack = new Stack<>();
	while (!stack.isEmpty() || root != null) {
		while (root != null) {
			stack.push(root);
			root = root.left;
		}
		root = stack.pop();
		res.add(root.val);
		root = root.right;
	}
    return res;
}

```



### 4. Extension

* [538. Convert BST to Greater Tree ](https://app.gitbook.com/@alittlebit/s/data-structures-and-algorithms-in-java/538.-convert-bst-to-greater-tree)

